---
published: true
---
## NIR passes

I've spent a lot of time talking about NIR and writing passes, so let's take a shallow dive into what exactly that means.

To start, there's this idea of a "lowering" pass, where "lowering" means reducing or changing some part of the shader representation. These passes are run for various reasons, ranging from handling compatibility (e.g., the `gl_FragColor` -> `gl_FragData[n]` pass I discussed previously) to optimizing the shader by removing unused variables and instructions.

## Basics
The most basic type of NIR pass, which is what I'll be covering quickly today since time got away from me, is the type that runs through a shader's instructions in order to rewrite a specific type of instruction.

Usually this starts out with this block:
```
   nir_foreach_function(function, shader) {
      if (function->impl) {
         nir_builder builder;
         nir_builder_init(&builder, function->impl);
         nir_foreach_block(block, function->impl) {
            nir_foreach_instr_safe(instr, block) {
               progress = lower_impl(instr, &builder);
            }
         }
     }
  }
```
In this, the pass iterates over the shader's functions, then creates a `nir_builder` (an object used for altering shader internals) while it iterates the blocks within the function. A function *block* is a group of instructions contained within a given scope, e.g., a conditional. The pass iterates into each block, looping over all the instructions and passing them to the `lower_impl` internal function for the pass, which is where all the work happens.

A pass I wrote earlier today searches fragment shaders for writes to `gl_SampleMask` and deletes them in order to mimic OpenGL behavior of ignoring that variable if a render target's sample count is zero:
```
static bool
lower_samplemask_instr(nir_intrinsic_instr *instr, nir_builder *b)
{
   nir_variable *out;
   if (instr->intrinsic != nir_intrinsic_store_deref)
      return false;

   out = nir_deref_instr_get_variable(nir_src_as_deref(instr->src[0]));
   if (out->data.location != FRAG_RESULT_SAMPLE_MASK || out->data.mode != nir_var_shader_out)
      return false;
   b->cursor = nir_after_instr(&instr->instr);
   nir_instr_remove(&instr->instr);
   return true;
}
```
This filters for *intrinsic* instructions, which are those defined as intrinsics in `mesa/src/compiler/nir/nir_intrinsics.py`, and then skips over all instructions which aren't *store_deref*. A *store_deref* is the instruction used when writing a value to a shader output. More filtering is done based on the variable used as the source of the operation (`instr->src[0]`) until the pass has located a `gl_SampleMask` write, and then the instruction is removed.

Important here is that true and false are returned by the implementation here to indicate progress. NIR has a feature where setting the `NIR_PRINT` environment variable causes the current NIR output to be printed any time a lowering pass changes the shader, so setting this correctly is important.

More on NIR passes in a future post.
