---
published: true
---
## I'm Back

Last week was my birthday (all week), and I decided to gift myself fewer blog posts.

Now that things are back to normal, however, I'll be easing my way back into the blogosphere. Today I'm going to be looking briefly at the benefits of [code from a recent MR](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/5954/diffs) by Erik Faye-Lund which improves memory allocation in `ntv` to let us better track all the allocations done in the course of doing compiler stuff, with the key benefit being that we're no longer leaking this entire thing every time we compile a shader (oops).

Mesa internals use an allocator called `ralloc`, and this was first added to the tree by Kenneth Graunke [way back in 7.10.1](https://docs.mesa3d.org/relnotes/7.10.1.html), or at least that was the earliest reference of it I could find. It's used everywhere, and it has a number of nice features that justify its use other than simple efficiency.

For this post, I'll be looking specifically at its memory context capability.

## Contextualize
Typically in C, we have our calls to `malloc`, and we have to track **all** these allocations, ensuring ownership is preserved, and then later call `free` at an appropriate time on everything that we've allocated.

Not so with the magic of `ralloc`!

A call to `ralloc_context()` creates a new memory context. Subsequent allocations for related objects requiring allocation can then pass this context to the related `ralloc_size()` calls, and this allocation will then be added to the specified context. At a later point, the context can be freed, taking all the allocated memory with it.

This enables code like:
```c
void *ctx = ralloc_context(NULL);
void *some_mem1 = ralloc_size(ctx, some_size1);
void *some_mem2 = ralloc_size(ctx, some_size2);
void *some_mem3 = ralloc_size(ctx, some_size3);
ralloc_free(ctx);
```
which will free all allocations created using `ctx`.

But wait, there's more! Every allocation made using `ralloc` is implicitly a context like this, which means that any time a struct is created with allocated members, the struct can be passed as a context, meaning that a destructor function for that struct can simply be written as a call to `ralloc_free()` which passes the struct, and newly-added members don't need to be deallocated.

So for example:
```c
struct somestruct *s = ralloc_size(NULL, sizeof(struct somestruct));
s->member1 = ralloc_size(s, sizeof(member1_size));
ralloc_free(s);
```
will free the struct and `member`, but also adding e.g.,:
```c
s->member2 = ralloc_size(s, sizeof(member2_size));
```
for a new member at some point requires no changes to the deallocation codepath.

## Future Work
At some point, it's likely we'll be going through the zink codebase to add more `ralloc` usage, both for helping to avoid memory leaks and for the other more general benefits that memory allocators bring over our existing usage of raw `malloc`.
