---
published: false
---
## At Last

Those of you in-the-know are well aware that Zink has always had a crippling addiction to [seamless cubemaps](https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Cubemap_Texture#Seamless_cubemap). Specifically, Vulkan doesn't support non-seamless cubemaps since nobody wants those anymore, but this is the default mode of sampling for OpenGL.

Thus, it is impossible for Zink to pass GL 4.6 conformance until this issue is resolved.

But what does this even mean?

## Cubes: They Have Faces Just Like You And Me
As veterans of intro to geometry courses all know*, a cube is a 3D shape that has six identically-sized sides called "faces". In computer graphics, each of these faces has its own content that can be read and written discretely.

When interpolating data from a cube-type texture, there are two methods:
* Using a *seamless* interpretation of a cube yields cases where pixels may be interpolated across the boundaries of faces
* Using a *non-seamless* interpretation of a cube yields cases where pixels may be clamped/wrapped at the boundary of a face

This effectively results in Zink interpolating across the boundaries of cube faces when it should instead be clamping/wrapping pixel data to a single face.

But who cares about all that *math* nonsense when the result is that Zink is still failing CTS cases?

\*Disclosure: I have been advised by my lawyer to state on the record that I have never taken an intro to geometry course and have instead copied this entire blog post off StackOverflow.

## How To Make Cubes Worse 101
In order to replicate this basic OpenGL behavior, a substantial amount of code is required—most of it terrible.

The first step is to determine when a cube should be sampled as non-seamless. OpenGL helpfully has [only one extension](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL/extensions/ARB/ARB_seamless_cube_map.txt) (plus [this other extension](https://www.khronos.org/registry/OpenGL/extensions/ARB/ARB_seamless_cubemap_per_texture.txt)) which control seamless access of cubemaps, so as long as that one state (plus the other state) isn't enabled, a cube shouldn't be interpreted seamlessly.

With this done, what happens at coordinates that lie at the edge of a face? The OpenGL [wrap](https://www.khronos.org/opengl/wiki/Sampler_Object#Edge_value_sampling) enum covers this. For the purposes of this blog post, only two wrap modes exist:
* edge clamping - clamp the coordinate to the edge of the face (`coord = extent` or `coord = 0`)
* repeat - pretend the face repeats infinitely (`coord %= extent`)

So now non-seamless cubes are detected, and the behavior for handling their non-seamlessness is known, but how can this actually be done?

## Excruciating
In short, this requires shader rewrites to handle coordinate clamping, then wrapping. Since it's not going to be desirable to have a different shader variant for every time the wrap mode changes, this means loading the parameters from a UBO. Since it's further not going to be desirable to have shader variants for each per-texture seamless/non-seamless cube combination, this means also making the rewrite handle the no-op case of continuing to use the original, seamless coordinates after doing all the calculations for the non-seamless case.

Worst of all, this has to be plumbed through the Rube Goldberg machine that is Mesa.

