---
published: true
---
# And Now For Something Slightly More Technical

It's a busy, busy week here. So busy I'm slipping on my blogging. But that's okay, because here one last big technical post about something I hate.

Swapchain readback.

# So Easy Even You Could Accidentally Do It
I'm not alone in drinking the haterade on this one, but GL makes it especially easy to footgun yourself by not providing explicit feedback that you're footgunning yourself.

I recently encountered a scenario in **REDACTED** where this behavior was commonplace. The command stream looked roughly like this:
* draw some stuff
* swapbuffers
* blitframebuffer

And this happened on every single frame (???).

# In Zink Terms...
This isn't pretty. Zink has an extremely conformant method of performing swapchain readback which definitely works without issues in all cases. I'd explain it, but it wouldn't make either of us happy, and I've got so much other stuff to do that I couldn't possibly... Oh, you really want to know? Well don't say I didn't warn you.

Vulkan doesn't allow readback from swapchains. By this, I mean:
* swapchain images must be acquired before they can be accessed for any purpose
* there is no method to explicitly reacquire a specific swapchain image
* there is no guarantee that swapchain images are unchanged after present

Combined, once you have presented a swapchain image you're screwed.

...According to the spec, that is. In the real world, things work differently.

Zink takes advantage of this "real world" utilization to implement swapchain readback. In short, the only method available is to spam present/acquire on the swapchain until the last-presented image is reacquired. Then it can be read back, and the image data is (probably) the same as when it was presented.

# ~~P E R F~~
This is not a speedy method of implementing readback. It requires a full sync, and it was designed for the purpose of passing unit tests, which is does perfectly. Performance was never a concern, because why would anyone ever be trying to do readback in... Why would anyone ever be trying to do readback in a performance-sensitive... Using OpenGL, why would anyone ever be...

Anyway, this is very unperformant, and here at SGC we hate all things of that nature. Given that I had my real world scenario from **REDACTED** in which this was happening every frame, something had to be done.

This solution isn't performant in the absolute sense either, but it's massively faster than what was happening previously. Once zink detects an app repeatedly footgunning itself at full speed, it activates readback mode for a swapchain and maintains a staging copy of every frame. This enables the image data to be read back at any time without synchronization at the cost of an extra full-frame copy. This roughly doubles FPS in the case I was testing, which is pretty good.

The functionality is [already merged](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/25754) for the upcoming 23.3 release.

Footgun as hard as you want.
