---
published: false
---
## Lavapipe: Dragged Into The Future

Some time ago I teased a new Mesa project that involved both features and perf. At last, it's time to unveil the goods: a [complete rewrite of all descriptor handling](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/22828) in Lavapipe thanks to one of RADV's raytracing tamers, Konstantin Seurer.

It's a feature that's been confounding developers and users everywhere for years, but thanks to Konstantin's tireless efforts over the past ETOOLONG, at last everyone will have the features they crave.

## Was It Really That Difficult?
Yes.

In short, the work required rewriting all the LLVM-based JIT to dynamically generate all the image/buffer access code instead of being able to use a more fixed-function style of JIT. As the MR shows, the diff here is massive, and work is still ongoing to make it work everywhere.

It's a truly Herculean effort by Konstantin that was only hindered by my goalpost-moving to fingerpaint in support for EXT_descriptor_buffer and EXT_mutable_descriptor_type.

## What Does This Mean?
Primarily it means that Lavapipe should start to be able to work with VKD3D-PROTON and play (haha) real games. This has more uses in CI purposes as well, allowing broader coverage for all layered drivers that depend on EXT_descriptor_indexing.

## And Perf?
Unfortunately, the added indirection is going to slightly reduce performance in some cases.

Work is ongoing to mitigate this, and I don't have any benchmark results.