---
published: false
---
# It's Not Maintenance5

I just got back from lunch and have to work off some cals, and that means it's time for another big lift on the blog. Today's topic: how dumb can a driver's compiler stack be?

As I outlined in the previous post, zink's compiler stack is about to get a whole lot dumber for various reasons. But what exactly does that look like?

Lesser bloggers would simply [link to the MR](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/mesa/mesa/-/merge_requests/24634) and say "figure it out".

Here at SGC, however, I put in the extra effort so my readers can see all the awfulness that goes into each individual graphical sausage that this triangle factory is pumping out.

Let's get at it.

# Step 1: How Much Work Is This, Exactly?
The key point of using the theoretical new NIR linker (that definitely exists and will be merged in finite time) is that it requires drivers to accept lowered i/o. This means, effectively, that zink must begin consuming lowered i/o as soon as it receives shaders. Naturally the first step to that was evaluating all the shader passes which operate on specific i/o variables using derefs (AKA "explicit" i/o:
* lower_64bit_vertex_attribs
* lower_64bit_vars
* split_blocks
* lower_bindless_io
* rewrite_read_as_0

The first four are called from `zink_shader_create`, the first time zink sees new shaders, while the last one is called `zink_compiler_assign_io`. As shaders won't have derefs again until just before they go through NTV, they'll all have to be...

What's that you say, creator of the patented Delete The Code methodology and planar YUV expert, Faith Ekstrand? I can just *delete* some of this code?

That sounds like a pretty smart idea. Looking at the list again, and then cross-referencing against all the features lowered i/o provides, let's see where that leads:
* ~~lower_64bit_vertex_attribs~~
  - `nir_lower_io_lower_64bit_to_32` is available during i/o lowering, so this can all be deleted
* lower_64bit_vars
  - the drivers that need this won't magically grow 64bit support for shader-local variables, but the parts that operate specifically on i/o can be deleted
* ~~split_blocks~~
  - this was written to improve XFB inlining and reduce the number of "extra" outputs needed to generate XFB data, but if new, location-based variables are being generated anyway this is no longer needed
* lower_bindless_io
  - this converts bindless texture i/o (because obviously you can just pass bindless texture handles between shader stages) to something that is spirv-legal
  - needs to be updated
* rewrite_read_as_0
  - this handles uninitialized reads from mismatched shader interfaces (i.e., the consumer reads more components than the producer writes)
  - needs to be updated
  
Not actually that much work, huzzah.

# Step 2: New Variables
As in the flowchart, this process involves taking explicit i/o, converting to lowered i/o, then converting back to explicit. Explicit i/o is characterized by using derefs to explicit variables for access, which means variables are needed. A work-intensive benefit to this means simpler variables: since lowered i/o is characterized by location-based access to components, the subsequent conversion back to explicit i/o can use entirely new variables, and since these variables are location-based, there's no need to retain any**\*** of the gross struct/array typing that GLSL yields.\
\* except where arrays are indirectly accessed

For those of you who are truly in the know, this means goku in his SSJB form

```glsl
struct TestStruct {
   dmat2x3 a[2];
   mat2x3 b[2];
   dvec2 c;
};
layout (location = 0, xfb_offset = 0) flat out TestStruct goku;
```

gets blasted into a series of smaller and more reasonable variables:

```
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT dvec3 goku#0 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR2.xyz, 2, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT dvec3 goku#1 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR4.xyz, 4, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT dvec3 goku#2 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR6.xyz, 6, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT vec3 goku#3 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR8.xyz, 8, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT vec3 goku#4 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR9.xyz, 9, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT vec3 goku#5 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR10.xyz, 10, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT vec3 goku#6 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR11.xyz, 11, 0)
decl_var shader_out INTERP_MODE_FLAT dvec2 goku#7 (VARYING_SLOT_VAR12.xy, 12, 0)
```

Beautiful and easy to parse.